The 7th IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems: Technology and Applications
12-14 September 2013, Berlin, Germany

Investigation of Payment Cards Systems
Information Security Control
Valeriy Dudykevych, Oleksandra Bakay, Yuriy Lakh
Information Security Chair of Lviv Polytechnic National University,
Ukraine, 79005, Lviv, vul. Knyazya Romana, 1, room #204,
julakh@polynet.lviv.ua, http://old.lp.edu.ua/index.php?id=ikta-zi
documents which regulate bank activities. NBU's
(National Bank of Ukraine) instruction "About special
payment means emission and transactions with them"
adopted 30.04.2010 [6] regulates the payment cards
security standard documents. Considered payment cards
work peculiarities the following issues must be regulated:
x payment cards emission security work support;
x bank actions directed on payment cards
transaction risks minimizing;
x security support during transactions with payment
cards and work with overdraft clients debts.

Abstract—Using Payment Card Industry Data Security
Standard (PCI DSS), introduced to the required obligatory
execution in 2008 for all organizations working with card
systems VISA, MasterCard, American Express, Discover
and JCB, has been described. Considered all the 12
requirements of the standard, proved their productivity and
the main ways of these requirements implementation in
payment cards automatic systems have been investigated.
Keywords—payment cards, standard, requirements,
authorized staff, privileges, coding, encryption, decryption

I.

INTRODUCTION

II.

New information technologies not only widened
business possibilities during the last years but also
increased its susceptibility. On one hand electronic
document and data exchange with clients and partners
through the Internet makes business more effective [1],
but on the other hand it threatens company's security [4].
There are no impregnable systems. Corporative net
vulnerability may cause not only financial damage but
also reputation damage, loss of competitive advantages
and other negative consequences. That is why it is
important to know how to protect corporative
infrastructure from the potential malefactor's actions.
However, lately bank information system hacking
happens more and more often all over the world, in
particular the abusing and stealing of payment card
holders data [3], [5]. That is why banks have to pay a lot
of attention to information/data security. At the present
banks have the correspondent experience in security of
their transactions. It is based on banks' complex approach
towards protective measures along all the stages the
transactions consist of:
x research and improvement of card standard
technology base as well as of transactions;
x counteraction to losses caused by abusing during
emission and acquiring;
x training of bank and trading (service) enterprises
personnel and obligatory qualification test for
those who have access to bank products - payment
cards.
Bank security documents including payment cards
security documents are among the most important bank

978-1-4799-1429-6/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

PCI DSS SEQURITY STANDARD PURPOSE

Growth of losses from payment cards transactions
became one of the main reasons that forced international
payment systems to join their efforts and take additional
measures to secure their clients. With this aim in 2004 a
common security requirement document was adopted Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard. It joined
security standards of the following payment systems:
VisaInt, MasterCard, American Express, Dicovercard and
JCB.
Later, in September 2006 PCI Security Standards
Council was established for the purpose of development
and implementation of PCI DSS. The main Council's
function is to develop and publish PCI standards,
accompany documents, requirements determination for
the companies that apply for PCI DSS /"QSA"/
certification and scanning /"ASV"/, certification, trainings
for future QSA auditors and audit control. In their turn
international payment systems report in accordance to
audit results and evaluate QSA work.
All organizations authorized by Visa, MasterCard,
American Express, Discover and JCB to hold, work with
and forward payment cards information must meet the
PCI DSS security standard. These organizations are banks,
other suppliers of payment services, Internet shops and
traditional trade enterprises.
Conformity is not one-time requirement. Trade
enterprises should show their conformity status once per
year, at the same time provide the conformity support
permanently.

651

III.

STANDARD REQUIREMENTS

the market. Otherwise the system will be additionally
vulnerable.

There are 12 obligatory requirements:
A. Intersystem Screen Configuration and Support for
the Purpose of Card Holder Data Security
The requirement was proved to be important not long
ago and points out on a necessity to use firewalls of ISA
type. Contemporary firewalls block attacks on the session
level as well as initialization of dangerous to web sites and
systems code that cannot be protected with the older
solutions.

G. Data Access Delimitation in Accordance With Office
Needs
Only authorized personnel have access to important
data. The best way is to introduce the so-called "white
lists" - in other words everything is prohibited. First all
privileges are cancelled, and after only authorized
personnel gets minimal rights enough for to work with
data.

B. Not to Use Manufacturer Installed by Default System
Passwords and Other Security Parameters
This requirement is not excessive since the majority of
companies - more than 60% - violate the rule installing
and using passwords by default [2]. Trusted Computing
base can be also used by malefactor. Operational systems
and applications are usually equipped with automatic
updating systems, but the majority of users do not pay
attention to it and do not update software from the
moment it was installed. Malefactors take the advantage
of it.
It also stands in the standard that the administrative
access code cannot be neglected. The IPSec, SSTP, SSL,
SSL/TLS technologies help with secure connection, that is
especially important in case of remote administrative
access.

H. Giving Each Person a Unique Identification Number
It helps to solve the problem when several users with
equal rights have an access to one and the same data base.
Double identification should be used for to strengthen
access control. The remote access with the help of
RADIUS and TACACS+ technologies gives more secure
identification.
I.

Physical Data Access Limitation
For security reasons the card information should be
processed and stored in a secure place. If it is not available
for some reason the physical control should be applied.
Data classification and paper resources are covered by the
rule.
J.

Net Resources Access Monitoring
Audit is one of the PCI conformity key components. It
helps to prove that the authorized user has access to the
card data and reveal unauthorized access attempts.
Monitoring and audit require date, time and transaction
result recording.

C. Card Holders Data Security Support
The requirement describes card holder/user data
(emitter bank is card owner). Ciphering should be used for
security purpose. Any recorded information should be also
ciphered. The standard is very precise: PIN-codes must
not be recorded, but the rule is not always followed.

K. Regular Security System and Process Testing
Regular security system testing is a part of PCI
standard. The systems with payment card information are
scanned. For companies that have web sites with online
payment opportunity, or store the credit card information
online (even one-time storage), or forward payment card
data with API monthly scanning is necessary.

D. Card Holder Data Ciphering During Their
Forwarding Through the Public Opened Networks
The requirement continues the previous one and is no
less important during payment transactions. The
requirement describes how data should be ciphered,
folded, distributed, secured, stored, forwarded, exchanged
and how cipher keys should be stored.

L. Information Security Policy Availability and
Following
Security policy concerns all PCI DSS requirements. It
should be worked out, published, spread and supported in
workable condition. It should contain maintenance rules
for critical devices and be precise about personnel and
partners duties concerning information security policy.
The official personnel security upgrading program should
be adopted and implemented.

E. Antivirus Software Using and Updating
The requirement can be standard itself, but usually a
big percentage of users do not have antivirus programs or
make mistakes using them. These users usually have weak
updating strategies and/or incorrectly installed antivirus
program that does not update itself and does not inform
personnel about necessary updating [2].

IV.

F. Secured System and Application Research and
Support
The correct application research and its further life
turned from recommendation to requirement in the PCI
DSS standard. Research and use are separated in it. All
test elements must be deleted before the product comes to

SOFTWARE SAFEGUARDS CONSTRUCTION
PRINCIPLES AND DEMANDS

Information protection software most significant
demerit is possibility to implement them in structural
elements of automatized systems only with processor.
Other information protection software demerits are:

652

x

and decrypt data, maintain their integrity as well as work
up digital signatures and certificates.
At the highest level Cryptography namespace could be
divided into four main parts, as shown at the Table I.

Using processor operate time which increases
request response time and therefore reduces
working operating efficiency.
x Decreasing of RAM volume as well as HDD
volume accessible for functional tasks to use.
x Possibility of random or suitable change, which
may cause not only loosing protection functions
but also become an additional security hazard.
x Restrictions due to strict orientation on the some
types data-flow computers architecture (even
among the same class) – program depending on
distinctive features of basic input/output system,
break-point vector table etc.
During organizing information protection software the
most typical is development of complex programs
fulfilling a number of protection functions, mostly users
detecting, delimitation access to data dimensions,
forbidding access to some RAM areas etc. The advantages
of such programs are obvious: each program provides
solving a number of important protection problems.
Taking into account the described demerits and
advantages, information protection software should
confirm such demands as: functional completeness,
flexibility and unified using.
Provided analysis showed that the most complete
correspondence for flexibility and unified demands
provides such set of principles: open-ended module
structure, total structuring, presentation at the machineindependent language.
Open-ended module construction principle lie in the
fact that any program at any level or volume has to be
presented as a system of possible modules. At the same
time every module at any level must be completely selfsupporting and have standard input and output, which
allow connection with any other modules. Therefore,
program software should be developed according to the
“downwards” principle i.e. according to total structuring
principle.
Formulation at machine-independent language means
that program module presentation should be in the form
allowing to include them most easily into the program
software of any automatized system. Such languages are
often multiplatform and have been supported by MS
CryptoAPI 2.0 and .NET Framework environments.
V.

TABLE I.

MAIN ELEMENTS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY NAMESPACE

Element

Description

Encryption
algorithm

Set of classes using for symmetric and
asymmetric encryption as well as for hashing.

Assisting
classes

Classes
maintaining
random
number
generation,
providing
transformation,
cooperation with CryptoAPI libraries as well as
encryption itself based on the stream model.
Classes determined at the namespace
System.Security.rptograph.
509Certificates presenting digital certificates.
Classes determining System.Cryptography.Xml
at namespace and presenting digital signatures
at XML-documents.

.509
certificates
Digital
signatures
XML

VI.

MAIN SYMMETRIC ALGORYTHMS REALIZATION IN
# LANGUAGE AT .NET FRAMEWORK

Symmetric cryptoalgorithms DES and 3DES (TDES)
are a few of symmetric cryptoalgorithms available from
standard crypto-providers CryptoAPI.
Generally DES has been no longer secure algorithm,
therefore it could be used only in the systems where
encryption safety is not critical.
Algorithm 3DES uses different keys DES for each of
iteration. 3DES/Triple DES variant using 2 keys is the
mostly used application in applied systems.
For investigation of data encryption/decryption during
their transferring in the unprotected environment was used
program module at C#, where beside DES and 3DES was
realized AES algorithm, which is presented by the class
Rijndael in .NET. This algorithm supports keys with
length 128, 192 and 256 bits.
Hereafter are presented open text and obtained its
cryptogram encrypted by Triple DES algorithm, key
length 192 bits with password “Rhbgnjpf[bcn” (Fig. 1, 2,
3).

CRYPTOAPI ENVIRONMENT

CryptoAPI supports work with symmetric and
asymmetric keys i.e. allows data encryption and
decryption as well as works with electronic certificates.
Set of supported cryptographic algorithms depends on the
concrete crypto-provider. The main part of cryptographic
classes .NET is based on the crypto-providers CryptoAPI.
.NETFramework includes a set of cryptographic
services, which are expanding similar Windows services
using
CryptoAPI.
System.Security.Cryptography
namespace opens program access to different
cryptographic services, using which supplements encrypt

Figure 1.

653

Encryption demonstration.

x

Simplicity of using – by means of available
simple interface.
Since used in program module algorithms have been
encryption international standards, therefore this module
could be used as a mean providing data security during
their storage as well as transferring through unprotected
net in pursuance of standard PCI DSS demands.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
PCI DSS is used to determine payment card holders
information security and to give recommendations to trade
and service enterprises, software producers and suppliers
about software security.
The standard was adopted for to help card holders and
card information holding organizations to secure their
business and minimize losses from fraud. It helps
organizations that work with cards to upgrade their
security level. But it cannot be taken as the only reason for
the abovementioned measures.
Elements of cryptographic protection were observed in
the paper as one of the Standard demands. Were described
means of encryption symmetric algorithms realization in
the .NET Framework environment and presented example
of encryption module, developed in this environment.
Module is available in open access and could be integrated
into any security system since was realized in high-level
program language.
Presented program realized encryption and decryption
and writes its work results into the text file. Program
allows to choose crypto algorithm itself as well as the
level of its stability (through key length determining)
direct-acting before the work beginning.

Figure 2.
Open text: ATM3598 – bankomat identifier; 2625 –
account number; 4042610070973332 – card number; 141965 –
security symbol; 2729 – client’s PIN; 50 – quantity of requested
money in UAH; 685 – transaction number; 008003990225 – all data
message control code.

Figure 3.

Cryptographed message.

Decoding is providing similarly indicating file
addresses using the same password. Changing password
changes also generated on its base key and initialization
vector making decoding impossible.
Summarizing, such program module possesses
following advantages:
x Variability – possible to select encryption
algorithm and its stability level (key length)
direct-acting during process of each file
encryption.
x Flexibility – program module is written at highlevel object-oriented language # and realized at
the platform .NET Framework allows be widely
used in different systems e.g. systems of the firm
Microsoft as well as in Unix-similar
environments.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

654

S. Budzherak, “Investigation of methods providing information
security in SWIFT system,” XIII International PhD Workshop
OWD 2011, 22–25 October 2011, Gliwice pp. 110–112, Webpage. - http://mechatronika.polsl.pl/owd/pdf2011/110.pdf
R.M. Magalhaes, “PCI DSS security,” Section: Web-page. http://www.windowsecurity.com
V.Gaikovitch, A.Pershin, Electronic Bank Systems Security.
United Europe, Moscow, 1994. (in Russian)
I. Goldovsky, The Internet Payments Security. Piter, SanktPetersburg, 2001. (in Russian)
V.K. Zadiraka, O.S. Oleksiuk, M.O. Nedashkovsky, Bank
Information Security Methods, Vyshcha Shkola, Kyiv, 1999. (in
Ukrainian)
National Bank of Ukraine instruction #223 “About special
payment means emission and transactions with them,” 30.04.2010.
Web-page. - http://zakon1.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/z0474-10. (in
Ukrainian)

