Ali MA, Arief B, Emms M, van Moorsel A.  
Does The Online Card Payment Landscape Unwittingly Facilitate Fraud? 

IEEE Security & Privacy 2017. In Press. 

 

 

Copyright: 

© 2017 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. 

Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective 
works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work 
in other works. 

DOI link to article: 

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/RecentIssue.jsp?punumber=8013  

Date deposited:   

01/12/2016 

 

 

 

Newcastle University ePrints - eprint.ncl.ac.uk 

 



Does The Online Card Payment Landscape 
Unwittingly Facilitate Fraud? 

Mohammed Aamir Ali, Budi Arief, Martin Emms, and Aad van Moorsel 

 

Abstract—This article provides an extensive study of the We came to an important observation that the difference in 
current practice of online payment using credit and debit cards, security solutions of various websites introduces a practically 
and the intrinsic security challenges caused by the differences in exploitable vulnerability in the overall payment system. An 
how payment sites operate. We investigated the Alexa top-400 attacker can exploit these differences to build a distributed 
online merchants’ payment sites, and realised that the current guessing attack which generates usable card payment details 
landscape facilitates a distributed guessing attack. This attack (card number, expiry date, card verification value, and postal 
subverts the payment functionality from its intended purpose of address) one field at a time. Each generated field can be used in 
validating card details, into helping the attackers to generate all succession to generate the next field by using a different 
security data fields required to make online transactions. We will 

merchant’s website. Moreover, if individual merchants were 
show that this attack would not be practical if all payment sites 

trying to improve their security by adding more payment fields 
performed the same security checks. As part of our responsible 

to be verified on their site, they potentially inadvertently weaken 
disclosure measure, we notified a selection of payment sites about 
our findings, and we report on their responses. We will discuss the whole system by creating an opportunity to guess the value 

potential solutions to the problem and the practical difficulty to of another field, as explained later in the article. 
implement these, given the varying technical and business We demonstrate the practicability of exploiting the 
concerns of the involved parties. vulnerabilities with software that implements the distributed 

guessing attack.  We will show that the potential impact of these 
Keywords—security; online payment; distributed attack; 

vulnerabilities is substantial because the card details generated 
fraudulent transactions; survey; ethical disclosure. 

by this distributed attack can be used to transfer money from a 
I. INTRODUCTION victim’s bank account to an anonymous recipient overseas using 

a financial services company such as the Western Union as a 

Ca rds are the de facto means of paying for online purchases. 
conduit. 

However, as the value of online sales has increased, so has 
the amount of online fraud. As an example, UK1 online The vulnerabilities described in this article apply to cards 

sales in 2014 was worth £45 billion, which represents a 16% that do not enforce centralised checks across transactions from 
growth between 2013 and 2014 [1]. In the same time period, the different sites. Our experiments were conducted using Visa and 
value of online fraud in the UK has increased by 33% to £217 MasterCard only. Whereas MasterCard’s centralised network 
million [1]. Online fraud is now the single largest category of detects the guessing attack after fewer than 10 attempts (even 
card fraud in the UK, representing 45% of the total value of the when those attempts were distributed across multiple websites), 
fraud committed against UK credit and debit cards [2].  Visa’s payment ecosystem does not prevent the attack (see 

Section VI.D). Because Visa is the most popular payment 
In this article, we present the online payment landscape in 

network in the world, the discovered vulnerabilities greatly 
detail. In particular, we aim to highlight the different manners in 

affect the entire global online payments system. 
which online payment is performed, and the varying security 
measures put in place by online merchants – from checking only We also carried out a responsible disclosure exercise with 
the card number and the expiry date, to fully-fledged centralised the payment sites affected by these vulnerabilities. Of the 342 
bank security mechanisms such as 3D Secure [3][4][5]. There is vulnerable websites, we presented our findings to the top-36 of 
a number of questions we would like to address: does the these sites (in terms of the severity of the vulnerabilities and the 
difference cause a security problem? if it does, how common is size of their customer base), monitored their responses, and 
the problem and can it be exploited? how much damage can be analysed the changes these websites have implemented to deal 
done? and how could it be resolved in the future? To determine with our disclosure. Several websites, including some of the 
the extent of the problem, we survey the ‘online payment largest and most popular websites in the world, changed their 
landscape’, creating a mapping of various merchant payment approach to online payment processing after our disclosure, as 
implementations. we will report later in this article. To protect the affected sites, 

                                                 
1 Sales and fraud statistics from regions other than the UK are less reliable but 
indicate the same pattern. 



we refrain from specifically revealing their names and their payment page of the online merchant’s website (action A in Fig. 
vulnerabilities.  1).  The merchant controls which data fields are used to authorise 

the payment. 
Finally, we discuss potential solutions to the problem. We 

will see that the vulnerabilities are systemic and cannot be The merchant then passes the card details to their chosen 
protected against in isolation by any individual online merchant payment gateway, which provides a service of authorising and 
or by the issuing bank through improving their own security processing the merchant’s payment request (action B). The 
policies.  But first, let us look into how current online payment payment gateway, on behalf of the merchant, can also 
system operates. implement additional security filters at this point (further details 

can be found in Section VI.C). The payment gateway then 
II. OVERVIEW OF THE ONLINE PAYMENT SYSTEM connects the merchant to the card payment network to request 

An online payment site uses a customer’s existing credit or payment from the customer’s bank account held at the card 
debit card to transfer funds from the customer’s bank account issuing bank. The payment networks (such as Visa and 
into the merchant’s bank account. For this to happen, the MasterCard) provide the link between payment gateways and 
customer needs to provide their card information during the thousands of card issuing banks (actions C and D).  
checkout. These pieces of information are then passed to the The card-issuer holds the customer’s bank account and 
card issuing bank, who will process the information further makes the approval of the payment (action E). The issuer 
before authorising or rejecting the payment request. This process maintains customer’s card record file, which contains 
involves a number of parties, each with different information such as account balance, customer name, full 
responsibilities. address, and other card details not visible to the rest of the 

payment network. In the final step, called a settlement, the card-
issuing bank subsequently deposits the customer’s money to the 
merchant’s bank account (actions F, G and H).  

B. Payment Card Data Fields 

An online payment is a “card-not-present” credit or debit 
card transaction [6]. This implies the merchant cannot physically 
verify that the customer actually has the card. The security of 
online payment is therefore dependent upon the customer 
providing data that only the owner of the card could know.  

The payment card industry has developed a Payment Card 
Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) [7], which provides 
a comprehensive set of rules and controls for the secure handling 
and storage of sensitive card data. However, there is no 
requirement for the merchant to request all of the data fields 
during an online payment authorisation, nor is there a mandatory 
requirement for the merchant to implement any of the optional 
security filters. Five pieces of information are typically used 
when making an online payment: 

 Cardholder Name: the account holder’s name as printed on 
the card. We found that no website checks that a name 
entered is correct. 

 16-digit Card Number: a unique identifier printed on the 
front of the card by the issuing bank.  Referred to as the 
Primary Account Number (PAN), it links the card to the 
customer’s bank account. 

 Card Expiry Date: printed or embossed on the front of the 
card. The expiry date and the PAN constitute the minimum 
set of card authentication data. 

 Card Verification Value (CVV2): a 3-digit number printed 
 on the reverse side of the card. It is meant to be known only 

Fig. 1. Actions and parties in online payment. to the person possessing the card. It should not be stored 
electronically anywhere in the payment ecosystem [7]. 

A. Online Payment Process and Parties Involved 
 Cardholder Address: not visible on the card but sometimes 

 Fig. 1 illustrates the actions and parties involved in used for payment authorisation purposes. Address 
processing online payments. The process involves the verification is performed only on the numerical values of the 
customer/cardholder entering their payment card details on the street/house and postcode fields; any alphabetical characters 



are ignored. Different websites perform varying levels of digits) is not as straightforward as getting the expiry date or 
verification on the address field’s numerical digits, ranging CVV2 because first, the attacker will need to narrow down the 
from verifying just the numerical digits in the postcode possible postcodes of the cardholder’s address. This can be done 
(partial match), to the complete numerical digits in postcode by querying the first six digits of a PAN through well-known 
plus the door number (full match) [8]. online databases such as BinDb [10] and ExactBins [11], which 

will reveal the card’s brand, issuing bank name, and card type. 
III. DISTRIBUTED GUESSING ATTACK Once the issuing bank is known, the attacker can increase the 

 To obtain card details, one can use a web merchant’s probability of guessing the right postcode by assuming that the 
payment page to guess the data: the merchant’s reply to a victim is likely to be registered with one of the branches nearby 
transaction attempt will state whether the guess was correct or – this is particularly relevant if the attacker uses NFC skimming 
not. The reason this attack works in practice is due to two to obtain the PAN and expiry date in the first place (see Section 
weaknesses, each not too severe on its own, but when used IV.B). Now, the attacker just needs to start brute force guesses 
together present a serious risk to the global payment system. from a list of issuing bank postcodes for a particular city where 

the card details have been skimmed from. 
The first weakness is that in many settings, the current online 

payment system does not detect multiple invalid payment IV. EXPERIMENTS 
requests on the same card from different websites. Effectively, 

We implemented a set of software tools to carry out the 
this implies that practically unlimited guesses can be made by 

distributed guessing attack, using the research team’s own cards 
distributing the guesses over many websites, even if individual 

to verify that it is indeed possible and practical to obtain all the 
websites limit the number of attempts. 

information of the card. Included are seven Visa cards with a 
Secondly, the attack scales well because different web spread of PAN, expiry date, and CVV2 values. We selected 400 

merchants provide different fields, and therefore allow the Alexa [12] top rated commercial websites for our investigation. 
guessing attack to obtain the desired card information one field These include many global websites such as iTunes, Google, 
at a time. To understand how essential the scaling issue is, we PayPal, and Amazon.  
look at the differences in websites in some more detail. The data 

A. Software Tools 
fields that web merchants use can be divided into three 
categories: The software tools implemented for the experiments consist 

of a website bot and automated scripts written in Java Selenium 
 2 fields: PAN + Expiry date (the absolute minimum) browser automation framework [13]. All the experiments were 

run on Mozilla Firefox web browser. Fig. 2 shows a screenshot 
 3 fields: PAN + Expiry date + CVV2 

of the website bot, which was used to automate the process of 
 4 fields: PAN + Expiry date + CVV2 + Address guessing relevant card information. The bot cycles through the 

possible values for each field to find the correct information.  
 Starting with a valid card number (PAN), to guess the expiry 

date an attacker can utilise several merchants’ websites that 
check only two fields: the card number and the expiry date. Once 
the expiry date is known, the attacker can use it along with the 
card number to guess the CVV2 information using another set 
of websites that check 3 fields (the card number, the expiry date, 
and the CVV2). 

Guessing an expiry date takes at most 60 attempts (banks 
typically issue cards that are valid for up to 60 months), and 
subsequently, guessing the 3-digit CVV2 takes fewer than 1,000 
attempts. Hence, expiry date and CVV2 are guaranteed to be 
obtained within 60 + 1,000 = 1,060 guesses. If all merchants 
would use three fields and ask for expiry date as well as CVV2, 
then it may take as many as 60 x 1,000 = 60,000 attempts. The 
difference between 1,060 and 60,000 is the difference between 
a quick and practical attack, and a tedious, close to impractical  
attack. Fig. 2. Screenshot of the website bot, farming CVV2 from multiple sites. 

 For many purposes, knowing the PAN, expiry date and 
B. Obtaining Card Data 

CVV2 is sufficient to use a card online, but for some purchases, 
an attacker would also need to obtain address information. To The PAN is the starting point for the generation of all of the 
guess address information, the attacker needs to use websites other card data fields. There are at least two known methods of 
that ask for 4 fields. The address field is used in a variety of obtaining valid PANs. Criminals sell bulk lists of card details 
manners, based on the Address Verification System (AVS), online. These lists are considered less valuable when they do not 
which validates the billing address provided by the customer contain the CVV2; nevertheless, such a list could be used as a 
against the address information stored by the card-issuing bank source of PANs from which the expiry date, CVV2 and address 
[6][8][9]. The process of getting cardholder’s address for the information can be generated. Another method is by exploiting 
countries that have a long postcode (more than 3 numerical the contactless feature common in recently issued payment 



cards. NFC skimming [14] provides an attacker with the PAN, these sites to guess the expiry date. 291 sites use three fields, 
the expiry date and in some cases, the cardholder’s name. It is which one can use for guessing the CVV2, and 25 sites use four 
also possible to generate PAN using the first six digits of a PAN fields, which allows one to guess the postcode of the address. 
and the Luhn’s algorithm [15] and getting it verified. However, Finally, of the 389 sites, 47 merchants (i.e. 12%) had 
we did not take this approach because it is crossing the boundary implemented 3D Secure payments (these sites are impervious to 
of ethical research—we only used our own cards. the distributed guessing attack, see Section VI.B). 

Once the PAN is known, an attempt to obtain the expiry date There is also a variation in the number of attempts allowed 
can commence. We note that sometimes the expiry date can be at each of these sites, ranging from 4, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, or even 
obtained at the same time as the PAN, for example by using the unlimited. In Table I, the number of sites that allow certain 
NFC skimming method described above. But if that is not number of guesses is shown in the rows, for each type of site (as 
possible, the bot can be used to systematically guess the expiry represented in the columns). We see that most sites (276) allow 
date of a given PAN on the websites that do not require CVV2 between 6 and 10 attempts, but 6 sites set no limit to the number 
to be entered. The next step in card data generation involves of attempts. There were two notable outliers to this observation 
getting the card’s CVV2. To find the correct CVV2, the bot will in the top-10 highly popular websites, one of which allowed 
simply need to cycle through the possible values starting from unlimited attempts to guess the CVV2, while the other required 
001 until the payment website blocks further attempts. A only the 16-digit card number plus the expiry date. 
handful of payment sites allowed unlimited attempts while most 

Our experiments successfully obtained the valid expiry date 
of the other payment sites allowed 5, 10 or even 50 attempts to 

for each of our Visa test cards, without exception. We also 
enter a correct CVV2. In our scenario, we “farm out” the brute 

managed to find valid CVV2 information for our Visa test cards, 
force guessing attack to tens or even hundreds of payment 

again without exception. We performed more than 11,000 
systems, which practically means we can carry out unlimited 

CVV2 iterations using our bot and scripts, and our experiments 
guesses. The final step generates the cardholder’s address. An 

confirmed that there is no centrally imposed limit on the number 
attacker can exploit the different variants of address verification 

of CVV2 attempts when distributing guesses over multiple 
system (discussed in Section III) to find the full address of the 

websites. The final step is to obtain the address information. Our 
cardholder.  

tests performed more than 3,000 iterations on the group of 
C. Transferring the Money websites that verify partial address (only postcode digits), to get 

Once either two, three, or four fields of the card data have numerical digits of the postcode. We extended our experiments 

been obtained, the attacker can use them to purchase goods on a and run instances of our bot on another set of payment sites 

website. This is damaging enough for the owner of the card, but (which verify the door number and the postcode digits) in order 

we looked at even more impactful attacks. Rather than buying to get the full address of all our Visa test cards. 

online goods from an e-commerce website, we created an attack 
TABLE I.  VARIATION IN PAYMENT SECURITY SETTINGS OF ONLINE 

scenario that uses the card details to open a money transfer PAYMENTS WEBSITES 
account, sends the money to an anonymous recipient abroad, 
where the money is picked up within minutes of issuing the Number Sites Sites Sites Sites Total 
transfer.  The attacker needs to be able to clear the funds before of with 2 with 3 with 4 with 3D 

the issuing bank reverses the payment and thwarts the attack. It attempts fields fields fields Secure 
allowed (guess (guess (guess (safe 

is therefore desirable from the attacker’s point of view that the 
expiry CVV2) address from 

funds are transferred to an account outside the country (because date) postcode) attack) 
it is more time consuming and costly to reverse payment across 
countries) or be conducted through a wire transfer to an 0 to 5 2 23 2 - 27 

anonymous cash recipient by using services such as the Western 6 to 10 20 238 18 - 276 
Union. 

11 to 50 2 28 3 - 33 

In our experiment, the card information extracted using our 
Unlimited 2 2 2 - 6 

bot was used to create a bogus account from which we 
transferred money to a recipient in India. Within minutes, we 3D 

- - - 47 47 
received a confirmation email for the order made, and our Secure  

contact confirmed the pick-up of the money. The time it took Total 26 291 25 47 389 
from the process of creating an account to collecting the money 

 
at the destination was only 27 minutes, which is short enough to 
avoid the bank reversing the payment. These experiments have also shown that it is possible to run 

multiple bots at the same time on hundreds of payment sites 
D. Results 

without triggering any alarms in the payment system. 
Our results (detailed in Table I) show that the distributed Combining that knowledge with the fact that an online payment 

guessing attack described in Section III is indeed practical and request typically gets authorised within 2 seconds makes the 
so a credible threat. We studied and tested the payment website attack viable and scalable in real time. As an illustration, with 
of 389 of Alexa’s most visited sites (we looked at the Alexa top- the website bot configured cleverly to run on 30 sites, an attacker 
400 sites, but 11 of them did not reveal sufficient useful can obtain the correct information within 4 seconds.  
information for our experiment). As shown in Table I, 26 sites 
use only two fields for card payment and an attacker would use 



V. RESPONSIBLE DISCLOSURE websites that modified their approach (labelled A to H), four 
used two fields (labelled ‘Exp. Date’ in the ‘Information Leak’ 

Two weeks after we completed the distributed guessing 
column) and four used three fields (labelled ‘CVV2’).   

attack experiments, we initiated an ethical/responsible 
disclosure exercise, notifying Visa and a selection of affected In most cases, we learned about the patching behaviour 
sites. Based on the number of fields that a website checks, we through manual observations, but in two cases (Website B and 
categorised them into three groups: expiry date, CVV2 and Website G), the affected websites notified us about the changes 
postcode. Since the total number of vulnerable websites was they made. Website A and Website B patched their checkout 
very high, we selected the 12 biggest players from each system by adding an address verification field. However, this 
category (in terms of the highest number of users), taking the was not a good idea because it did not provide additional 
total number of notified websites to 36.  security, but instead opened up a new avenue for guessing as 

will be discussed at the end of this section. 
Once a suitable contact person or team for each website was 

found, we presented them with the disclosure information that Typically, an online payment request is authorised almost 
featured the experiments we performed and the type of instantly (within 2 seconds). From our observation, we noticed 
vulnerabilities on their site. We used our official work/university that Website C and Website D (both with expiry date leak) had 
email address and this served as a means for these merchants to introduced additional delays to the payment authorisation 
trace us back, so that they can verify our authenticity. This processing times. They did it in a staggered manner: few 
would also allow them to request more detailed and technical attempts were processed instantly but after certain incorrect 
information about our experiments should they wish to find out attempts had taken place, the time taken for payment 
more. confirmation were increased. In this manner, fewer attempts 

were available (at least practically speaking) to enter the right 
We recorded the responses received from these websites 

expiry date without setting a hard upper bound to the number of 
over the duration of four weeks after we disclosed the 

attempts.   
vulnerabilities to them. Altogether, we received 20 human 
responses from 10 websites and 18 websites came back to us We found that Website E (one of the Alexa top-10 websites 
with machine generated response mostly confirming the receipt in terms of the number of visitors) patched their checkout system 
of our notification. All of the human responses requested more by adding PAN velocity filters, reducing the number of attempts 
technical details while some asked us to suggest solutions. Out allowed (based on the PAN) from unlimited to 100 attempts 
of the 36 websites we contacted, eight never responded. When a within 24 hours. Website F followed a similar approach and 
web merchant requested more information, we offered them an added IP-based velocity filter to limit the number of attempts to 
initial draft of this article, which explained the experiments and get CVV2 from 50 to 10 in 24 hours. Initially, Website G and 
the attack to help them understand the actual problem. We Website H added CAPTCHA on their checkout page, thus 
followed the disclosure policy requested by the websites and disrupting our bot from carrying out the attack. Our experiment 
anonymised the affected sites in our article.  protocol limited the interaction with the administrators of 

notified websites. Due to complex trade-offs that payment 
TABLE II.  NATURE OF PATCHING ON THE NOTIFIED WEBSITES websites need to consider when deciding which fields and filters 

to use, our ethical disclosure protocol did not volunteer advice 
  Patching Behaviour 

about what actions to take to deal with the vulnerabilities. 
Web Informa Adding Adding Adding Adding Adding However, in one situation we felt we needed to depart from the 
site tion Addr. Delay velocity velocity CAPTC protocol, namely in the case of Websites G and H, who added a 

Leak field filter filter filter (IP HA CAPTCHA. CAPTCHAs prevent automated attempts in getting 
(PAN based) 
based) the sensitive card information but may adversely affect the 

usability of those websites [16]. To help Websites G and H to 
A Exp. date √     better understand the implications of adding a CAPTCHA, we 
B Exp. date √     provided these two websites with more detailed information 

about the attacks. This resulted in the CAPTCHA being replaced 
C Exp. date  √    with IP address velocity filters, which allowed five attempts per 
D Exp. date  √    IP address in 24 hours (hence a mark in two cells in Table II for 

these websites). 
E CVV2   √   

 The overall result of our study on the nature of patching on 
F CVV2    √  

the notified websites revealed that the vast majority (78%) did 
G CVV2    √ √ not make a change. We do not know the reason behind this and 
H CVV2    √ √ further research will be needed to find the explanation. Of the 

eight that patched, the general approach taken by merchants is 
 either to add a filter to make it more cumbersome to try many 
As a result of our disclosure process, eight of the 36 websites times (6 of 8 sites that patched added delay or velocity filters), 

changed their online security settings but the other 28 websites or to add a field (Website A and Website B). Perhaps 
remained unchanged four weeks after the disclosure. We call surprisingly, none of the sites reacted by simply putting a hard 
such changes ‘patches’ in what follows, and Table II illustrates limit on the number of allowed attempts. The effect of these 
the nature of the patching of the notified websites. Of the eight patching behaviours is not so obvious. As we already pointed 



out, the sensible measure of limiting the number of attempts will attack described in this article since the issuing bank has 
not stop the guessing attack if it is not done on all websites. visibility of all transaction requests directed at a single card, 
Furthermore, adding a card validation field may be a reasonable even if those requests are distributed across many websites.  
idea for a site for various reasons, but inadvertently may even 

From the perspective of the merchant, 3D Secure has several 
weaken the protection against the guessing attack of the payment 

drawbacks, and these are reflected in that only 47 merchants in 
system as a whole. After all, the added field may be a welcome 

the Alexa top-400 have elected to implement 3D Secure. First, 
opportunity to attempt guesses on this added card detail.  

the proportion of the customers who do not complete the 
VI. THE CHALLENGES IN SOLVING THE PROBLEM transaction can be high when the customer encounters the 3D 

Secure login screen: up to 43% in the United States and 55% in 
Improving the security of the online payment system is a China [17]. Second, there are additional costs associated with 

complicated challenge for a variety of reasons. One could argue implementing 3D Secure. 
that payment card security mechanisms are bound to remain 
unsatisfactory since they have not been designed for distributed We reiterate that from the whole payment system’s 
operation over the distributed Internet. Many of the solutions, perspective, we would need a very high adoption rate of 3D 
such as 3D Secure can be seen as afterthoughts, and they Secure technology to prevent the distributed attack, because the 
struggle to gain widespread adoption. Any suggested attack would still work as long as there are sufficient vulnerable 
improvement or solution faces the challenge that the online websites not using 3D Secure. 
landscape contains many players that all have their own – at 

C. Payment Gateway 
times competing – incentives for or reasons against change. Any 
solution would have to combine technical concerns with There are many payment gateways, which charge web 
financial and business operational concerns, and its adoption merchants different rates depending on the number of fields and 
will depend on legal and economic dynamics. We explore and filters they ask to check and utilise. One cannot expect all of 
discuss these issues from the perspectives of the five parties these gateways to be able to coordinate sufficiently to prevent 
shown in Fig. 1. the distributed guessing attack. Nevertheless, payment gateways 

can provide advanced features to their merchants, and these 
A. Customer / Cardholder features should at least make it more difficult to exploit a 

Since the distributed guessing attack described in this article website for the attack. Most importantly, gateways may use IP 
uses merchant websites and card payment network to get all the address velocity filters [6][8][9], which are implemented to 
card details, there is not much a cardholder can do to prevent it. detect repeated invalid attempts made within a certain time span 
At the same time, the cardholder is severely impacted by the from the same IP address. But with no coordination between 
attack: money may be lost, cards may have to be blocked, and different gateways, these velocity filters can easily be 
the result is a waste of time and effort and a decreased sense of circumvented just by switching to a website that uses a different 
security. Arguably, it would be beneficial for cardholders if they payment gateway.  
could get organised as a group, or would have representatives in 

D. Card Payment Network 
various bodies, to put pressure on the other stakeholders. As an 
individual, cardholders could ‘vote with their feet’ and select Responsibility for authorising online payment requests 
cards from card payment networks that are not exposed to the ultimately resides with the bank which issued the credit / debit 
distributed guessing attack. At the moment, the payment system card.  However, our experiments have shown that distributed 
is too complex and non-transparent to expect customers to be guessing attack described in the paper only works on Visa cards, 
able to make such choices.       independent of which bank issued the card.  When the attack is 

applied to a MasterCard, the distributed attack is detected.  This 
B. Online Merchant suggests that the payment networks have the capability to detect 

On their own, a merchant can do very little to prevent and prevent a distributed attack where the network is globally 
distributed guessing attacks. All merchants would have to agree integrated [18]. 
or be forced to use the same number of fields so that the guessing 

The most obvious defence against the distributed guessing 
attack cannot be staged as explained in Section III. 

attack would be at the level of the card payment network. 
At the same time, a merchant can avoid being exploited in However, we are not in a position to know whether payment 

the attack either by only using cards that use a payment network network providers could modify their network infrastructure to 
that is not vulnerable from the attack, or by using 3D Secure detect payment requests from multiple, globally spread payment 
technologies recommended by the payment card industries [7], gateways, looking for suspicious activities on a single card 
such as the American Express ‘SafeKey’ [3], ‘Verified by Visa’ distributed across multiple merchant websites.  
[4] and MasterCard ‘SecureCode’ [5]. If 3D Secure is 

E. Card Issuing Banks 
implemented, the card issuing bank is responsible for 
authenticating a cardholder before authorising the payment and The bank comes into play at the final stage of the payment 
it monitors the frequency of transactions and the total value of process, to approve the transfer of funds, but it would not be 
purchases for each card or bank account. The system will initiate party to each individual guess (unless 3D Secure is used). Banks 
additional security checks such as IP address and/or request an play an important role in limiting the damage that can be done if 
additional password if the frequency or value of the transactions attackers get hold of card information. Many issuing banks are 
appears to be unusual. Our experiments confirmed that 3D now running intelligent fraud detection systems which detect 
Secure payments are protected from the distributed guessing transactions which are outside their customer’s normal spending 



habits [6]. The issuing bank then has the option to block the [3] American Express SafeKey, “Product Capability Guide,” 

payment, or ask the customer for confirmation, or accept the https://network.americanexpress.com/en/globalnetwork/Images/SafeKey
ProductCapabilityGuide_2014.pdf, Accessed: 04 Mar 2016. 

payment taking a calculated risk that a transaction may be found 
[4] Visa, “3D Secure System Overview,” 

to be fraudulent later. A complicated set of considerations comes 
http://www.visanet.com.pe/verified/demovisanet-

to the fore in the bank’s decisions, from ease of use to financial web/resources/3DS_70015-01_System_Overview_external_v1.0.3.pdf, 
risks. However, one would expect that if they so desire, banks 2001, Accessed: 12 May 2016. 
could have considerable influence on the payment gateways and [5] MasterCard, “MasterCard Secure Code, “Merchant Implementation 
card payment networks in protecting against the distributed Guide,” https://www.mastercard.us/content/dam/mccom/en-

guessing attack.  us/documents/SMI_Manual.pdf, 2014, Accessed: 13 May 2016. 

[6] Visa, “Card Acceptance Guidelines for Visa Merchants,” 
VII. CONCLUSION http://usa.visa.com/download/merchants/card-acceptance-guidelines-for-

visa-merchants.pdf, 2014, Accessed: 13 May 2016 
In this paper, we studied 400 of the most popular e-

[7] Payment Card Industry, “PCI DSS Applicability in an EMV 
commerce websites and surveyed their web payment interface, Environment,” 
identifying that different websites present different sets of fields https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/documents/pci_dss_emv.pdf, 

to identify the cardholder. It turns out that this disparity between 2010, Accessed: 13 May 2016. 

different websites inadvertently creates conditions for a scalable [8] PayPal, “Gateway Developer Guide and Reference,” 

distributed guessing attack. By conducting a guessing attack one https://www.paypalobjects.com/webstatic/en_US/developer/docs/pdf/pa
yflowgateway_guide.pdf, 2014, Accessed: 11 Mar 2016. 

field at the time – using a set of appropriate websites at each 
[9] MasterCard, “Transaction Processing Rules,” 

stage – the attack becomes practical. With the obtained data, the 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/pdf/TPR-

attacker can make purchases or transfer funds, as we have Entire_Manual_public.pdf, 2014, Accessed: 13 May 2016. 
demonstrated.  [10] BinDb, “Bank Identification Numbers Database - Credit Card Bin 

Lookup,” https://www.bindb.com/structure.html, Accessed: 13 May 
We showed that the attack works if the card payment 

2016. 
network is not able to relate card activities from different 

[11] ExactBins, “Exact BIN Database,” https://www.exactbins.com/features, 
websites.  Fundamentally, much of the problem with card Accessed: 13 May 2016. 
payment stems from the fact that the identity of the payer needs [12] Alexa, “Alexa Top Shopping Sites,” 
to be established in the ‘card-not-present’ mode. This is http://www.alexa.com/topsites/category/Top/Shopping, Accessed: 13 
inherently problematic since it is at odds with the original use of May 2016. 

cards (where the card and cardholder are present at the moment [13] SeleniumHQ, "Selenium framework documentation. 

of purchase). It also implies that, for instance, Chip-and-PIN is http://docs.seleniumhq.org/docs/, Accessed: 17 May 2016. 

not available to establish the identity of the payer. This is [14] M. Emms, B. Arief, L. Freitas, J. Hannon, and A. van Moorsel, 

exacerbated by the fact that the Internet facilitates distribution “Harvesting High-Value Foreign Currency Transactions from EMV 
Contactless Credit Cards Without the PIN,” In Proceedings of the 2014 

of guesses for data fields over many merchant sites. 
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security 

To prevent the attack, either standardisation or centralisation (CCS’14), ACM, 2014, pp. 716-726. 

can be pursued (some card payment networks already provide [15] Symantec, “Validating a Credit Card Number using Luhn’s Algorithm. 
https://support.symantec.com/en_US/article.TECH221769.html 

this). Standardisation would imply that all merchants need to [Accessed: 09 May 2016] 
offer the same payment interface, that is, the same number of 

[16] A. El Ahmad, J. Yan and W. Ng, "CAPTCHA Design: Color, Usability, 
fields. Then the attack does not scale anymore. Centralisation and Security", IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 44-51, 2012. 
can be achieved by payment gateways or card payment networks [17] Adyen, "Analysis Reveals Worldwide Impact of 3D Secure on 
possessing a full view over all payment attempts associated with Transaction Conversion Rates,” https://www.adyen.com/home/about-
its network. Neither standardisation nor centralisation naturally adyen/press-releases/2014/3d-secure-worldwide-impact-conversion, 

fit the flexibility and freedom of choice one associates with the 2014, Accessed: 13 May 2016. 

Internet or successful commercial activity, but they will provide [18] MasterCard, “The MasterCard Network Advantage,” 

the required protection. It is up to the various stakeholders to http://newsroom.mastercard.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/09/MasterCard-Network-Advantage.pdf, 

determine the case for and timing of such solutions. Accessed: 12 May 2016 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

This material is based in part on research supported by the Mohammed Aamir Ali is currently a Ph.D. research student at 
UK EPSRC EP/K006568 Research Institute for Science of the centre of cybercrime and computer security at Newcastle 
Security—Choice Architecture for Information Security. University, UK. His research centres around exploiting the 

potential vulnerabilities in the payment eco-system (i.e. NFC 
REFERENCES mobile payments, payment applications and online payments). 

[1] UK Office for National Statistics, “Retail Sales, February 2015,” Understanding the insidious tactics targeting the world of cyber 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_399119.pdf, 26 March 2015, systems gives Mohammed an in-depth insight into the methods 
Accessed: 13 May 2016. and psychology of attackers. He has ongoing research which 

[2] Financial Fraud Action UK, “Fraud the Facts 2015: The definitive involves landscaping the developments and security challenges 
overview of payment industry fraud and measures to prevent it,” London: in the ecommerce payment systems. Contact him at 
UK Cards Association, 2015, 

m.a.ali2@ncl.ac.uk 
www.financialfraudaction.org.uk/download.asp?file=2979, Accessed: 13 
May 2016. Budi Arief is a Lecturer in the School of Computing at the 

University of Kent, England. His research interests are in 



cybercrime, the security and dependability of computer-based experience; working as a solutions architect in payments and as 
systems, cyber security education, and the Internet of Things, a systems designer of safety critical embedded control systems 
with a strong overarching element of interdisciplinary research. for MoD, satellite comms, nuclear power and transport. 
He obtained his B.Sc. in Computing Science (First Class) and 

Aad van Moorsel is Professor and Head of School at the School 
Ph.D. in Computing Science, both from Newcastle University, 

of Computing Science in Newcastle University.  His research 
England. Prior to joining the University of Kent, Budi was a 

interests are in cyber security and cybercrime, with an emphasis 
Senior Research Associate in the School of Computing Science 

on decision making, quantification and risk management.  He 
at Newcastle University, England. Contact him at 

received a PhD in computer science from the University of 
b.arief@kent.ac.uk 

Twente, The Netherlands.  Contact him 
Martin Emms is a cyber security researcher at Newcastle ataad.vanmoorsel@ncl.ac.uk. 
University focusing on the security impacts of new payment 

 
technologies, user authentication using ubiquitous and IoT 
technologies and related security issues caused by unintentional  

privacy leakage. Martin’s work is enhanced by his industry